# A more comprehensive and reliable analysis of individual differences with generalized random forest: validation and guidelines      
Jinwoo Lee*, Junghoon Justin Park*, Maria Pak*, Seung Yun Choi*, Jiook Cha\(\dag \)   
* equally contributed; \(\dag \) corresponding author   

repository written by    
Jinwoo Lee (https://jinwoo-lee.com)     

**Preprint:** [https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.28.685232](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.28.685232)

## Abstract
Analyzing individual differences in treatment or exposure effects is a central challenge in psychology and behavioral sciences. Conventional statistical models have focused on average treatment effects, overlooking individual variability, and struggling to identify key moderators. Generalized Random Forest (GRF) can predict individualized treatment effects, but current implementations suffer from two critical limitations: (1) prediction performances vary substantially across random initializations, and (2) identification of key moderator is limited in high-dimensional settings. Here, we introduce two methodological advances to address these issues. First, a seed ensemble strategy stabilizes predictions by aggregating models trained under different random initializations. Second, a backward elimination procedure systematically identifies key moderators from high-dimensional inputs. Simulation analyses across diverse scenarios demonstrate that our approach achieves reliable and valid predictions across random seeds, improved performance in moderator identification, and robust generalization to independent data. To facilitate adoption and interpretation, we provide step-by-step guidance using large-scale neuroimaging dataset (*N* = 8,778) with reusable code. These enhancements make GRF more reliable for modeling individual differences in treatment effects, supporting data-driven hypothesis generation, and identification of responsive subgroups.



## Data Availiability  
The data that support the findings of real-world tutorial analyses in this paper are available from the **Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study** via the National Institute of Mental Health Data Archive (NDA; [https://nda.nih.gov/abcd/request-access](https://nda.nih.gov/abcd/request-access)) upon formal application and approval by the ABCD consortium. All simulation data can be generated by our simulaton scripts. 


## Guided Tour for Analysis Scripts 
*(TBD)*

## Citation
If you use this repository in your research, please cite the following preprint:

Lee, J., Park, J. J., Pak, M., Choi, S. Y., & Cha, J. (2025). A more comprehensive and reliable analysis of individual differences with generalized random forest for high-dimensional data: validation and guidelines. *bioRxiv*, 2025-10.

```bibtex
@article{Lee2025GRF,
  author    = {Lee, J. and Park, J. J. and Pak, M. and Choi, S. Y. and Cha, J.},
  title     = {A more comprehensive and reliable analysis of individual differences with generalized random forest for high-dimensional data: validation and guidelines},
  journal   = {bioRxiv},
  year      = {2025},
  pages     = {2025-10},
  doi       = {},
  url       = {https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.28.685232},
  note      = {Preprint}
}


